Add philosophy section to the docs as well as navigation (#208)
dwavesystems/dwave-optimization: docs/philosophy.rst

.. _optimization_philosophy:

==========
Philosophy
==========

`dwave-optimization` and

> the `Leap <https://cloud.dwavesys.com/leap/>`_\ |TM| service's quantum-classical

Author: :shrug:

A fundamental rule of physics is that everything tends to seek a minimum energy state.
Objects slide down hills; hot things cool down over time.
This behavior is also true in the world of quantum physics.
Quantum annealing simply uses quantum physics to find low-energy states of a
problem and therefore the optimal or near-optimal combination of elements.

To learn more about solving optimization problems with quantum computers, see
:ref:`qpu_index_get_started`.

.. _optimization_philosophy_linear_programming:

(Mixed-Integer) Linear Programming
==================================

Much of the mathematical optimization done today is done with
`linear programming <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_programming>`_
solvers and techniques.

Users familiar with linear programming techniques will find many concepts in
`dwave-optimization` familiar: objective functions; continuous, linear, and binary variables;
constraints; and feasible regions are all concepts found in linear programming.

However, unlike linear solvers, `dwave-optimization` allows
`nonlinear <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonlinear_programming>`_ relationships

> among variables, constraints, and the objective function.

Author: You can have a nonlinear relationship among the constraints

> among variables, constraints, and the objective function.

Reviewer: Good point. Still need to revise so as not to say "relationships among ... the objective function" (plural vs singular)

> among variables, constraints, and the objective function.

Author: ```rst
However, unlike linear solvers, `dwave-optimization` allows
`nonlinear <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonlinear_programming>`_ relationships
among variables, constraints, and intermediate values such as the objective value.
```

.. _optimization_philosophy_combinatorial_variables:

Lists, Sets, and other combinatorial variables
==============================================

While many optimization problems can be expressed using only scalar variable

> types (continuous, integer, and binary), it is often convenient to use other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
types (continuous, integer, and binary), it is often beneficial to use
```

combinatorial structures.

> In the following example, we will contrast a classic mixed integer linear programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example contrasts a classic mixed integer linear programming (MILP)
```

You use the MILP abbreviation below

formulation using scalar variables with one that uses a list variable.

> Example - Traveling Salesperson

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: Traveling Salesperson
```

> Example - Traveling Salesperson

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traveling-Salesperson Example
```

This option even preserves your hyphen!

-------------------------------

> The goal of renowned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of the renowned
```

`traveling salesperson problem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Travelling_salesman_problem>`_

> is, for a given a list of cities and distances between each pair of cities, to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(TSP) is, for a given a list of cities and distances between each pair of cities, to
```

You use the abbreviation below

find the shortest possible route that visits each city exactly once and returns
to the city of origin.

> If we wish to restrict ourselves to scalar variables,
> a common mixed-integer linear programming formulation for solving a TSP with
> :math:`N` cities is to use :math:`N^2` binary variables and :math:`2N`
> constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When restricted to scalar variables, a common MILP formulation for solving a TSP
with :math:`N` cities uses :math:`N^2` binary variables and :math:`2N`
constraints.
```

> .. dropdown:: MILP formulation details

Reviewer: I ❤️ this use of the dropdown

    Let

    .. math::

>         

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Trailing spaces

        x_{it} =

>             \begin{cases} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            \begin{cases}
```

Trailing space

                1 \text{ if the salesperson is in city } i \text{ at time } t \\
                0 \text{ otherwise} \\
            \end{cases}

    If :math:`d_{i,j}` gives the distance from city :math:`i` to city :math:`j` then
    the objective is to minimize the total tour length

    .. math::

        \sum_{st} \sum_{ij} x_{is} x_{jt} d_{ij}

    subject to constraints that the salesperson cannot be in two cities
    at the same time, nor any city twice

    .. math::

        \sum_i x_{it} = 1 \text{  } \forall t \\
        \sum_t x_{it} = 1 \text{  } \forall i

> However, the solution to this problem is defined by an ordered list of cities.
> For example, a three city traveling salesperson problem has
> `(0, 1, 2)`, `(0, 2, 1)`, `(1, 0, 2)`, `(1, 2, 0)`, `(2, 0, 1)`, and `(2, 1, 0)`
> as possible solutions.
> Therefore, rather than thinking about scalars, we can define a *list* variable as
> any permutation of the integers from :math:`[0..N)`.
> Another advantage of this approach is that the problem is unconstrained!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the solution to this problem is defined by an ordered list of cities.
For example, a three-city TSP has these possible solutions: `(0, 1, 2)`,
`(0, 2, 1)`, `(1, 0, 2)`, `(1, 2, 0)`, `(2, 0, 1)`, and `(2, 1, 0)`.
Therefore, rather than working with scalars, you can define a *list* variable as
any permutation of the integers from :math:`[0..N)`, significantly reducing the
number of problem variables. Another advantage of this approach is that the
problem is unconstrained!
```

See the alternative below (links to `list()`)

> However, the solution to this problem is defined by an ordered list of cities.
> For example, a three city traveling salesperson problem has
> `(0, 1, 2)`, `(0, 2, 1)`, `(1, 0, 2)`, `(1, 2, 0)`, `(2, 0, 1)`, and `(2, 1, 0)`
> as possible solutions.
> Therefore, rather than thinking about scalars, we can define a *list* variable as
> any permutation of the integers from :math:`[0..N)`.
> Another advantage of this approach is that the problem is unconstrained!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the solution to this problem is defined by an ordered list of cities.
For example, a three-city TSP has these possible solutions: `(0, 1, 2)`,
`(0, 2, 1)`, `(1, 0, 2)`, `(1, 2, 0)`, `(2, 0, 1)`, and `(2, 1, 0)`.
Therefore, rather than working with scalars, you can define a
:meth:`~dwave.optimization.model.Model.list` variable as any permutation of the
integers from :math:`[0..N)`, significantly reducing the number of problem
variables. Another advantage of this approach is that the problem is
unconstrained!
```

Same as the alternative but with a hyperlink to `list()`

> .. dropdown:: Formulation with a list variable details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: Formulation with a list variable
```

    Let `x` be a list variable of length `N` with `x_t` giving
    the city the salesperson visits at time `t`. Let's define `x_N = x_0` for

>     convenience.

Author: One tick is math, no? But sure I can be explicit

>     convenience.

Author: It is implicitly in the sum. 
```
\sum_t d_{x_t, x_{t+1}}
```
doesn't explicitly include the `\sum_t^N` but a careful reader would notice that `x_{t+1}` would go "out of bounds"

>     convenience.

Reviewer: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/970c3885-3f1c-4d94-8cfb-d5a96714124a)

>     convenience.

Reviewer: Maybe make it explicit to clarify what the "Let's define... " refers to?

>     convenience.

Author: I'll move it to make it clearer.

   :header-rows: 2

   , MIQP, , Nonlinear
   # of Facilities, Variable Domain Size, # of Constraints, Variable Domain Size, # of Constraints
   N, :math:`2^{N^2}`, :math:`2N`, :math:`N!`, 0
   5, 33554432, 10, 120, 0
   10, 1267650600228229401496703205376, 20, 3628800, 0

By using the list formulation, the search space is much smaller and
the solver is more likely to be able to find an optimal solution.

.. _optimization_philosophy_tensor_programming:

Tensor Programming
==================

`NumPy <https://numpy.org/>`_ is the most popular scientific computing library
in Python. The NumPy library contains data structures for multidimensional arrays.
To learn more, NumPy provides an excellent
`introduction to arrays <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/absolute_beginners.html>`_.

Working with arrays can be beneficial for readability and for performance.
Consider calculating the dot product of two lists of numbers ``a`` and ``b``.
This can be accomplished in Python with

.. code-block:: python

    a = [...]
    b = [...]
    value = sum(u * b for u, v in zip(a, b))

But it is more readable and more performant to express it using array operations

.. code-block:: python

>     a = np.asarray([...])

Author: I've dropped all of the imports in these examples for clarity. IMO if the user doesn't recognize the `np.` convention then this section is not for them :slightly_smiling_face:
